---
title: "Assistive Technology for Aiding Tumor Resection in Skull-Base Surgery"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/ismr2019
excerpt: 'This paper is about optimizing an Augmented Reality application for tumor excision to render under limited compute.'
date: 2019-04-05
venue: ' International Symposium on Medical Robotics 2019'
paperurl: 'https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8710203'
citation: 'N. Kalavakonda, L. Sekhar and B. Hannaford, "Augmented Reality Application for Aiding Tumor Resection in Skull-Base Surgery," <i>2019 International Symposium on Medical Robotics (ISMR)</i>, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2019, pp. 1-6.
doi: 10.1109/ISMR.2019.8710203'
---
Abstract: Treatment  of  cancer  patients  has  improved  with advances  in  tumor  resection  techniques  for  skull-base  surgery.
However,   a   secondary   procedure   or   chemotherapy   is   often required  to  treat  residual  tumor  to  prevent  recurrence.  
With the  advent  of  assistive  technology,  such  as  augmented  reality,a  myriad  of  possibilities  have  been  facilitated  for  the  field  of surgery. 
This  work  explores  the  development  of  an  augmented reality application to improving the tumor margin excised during surgical  procedures,  with  a  focus  on  skull-base  surgery.  
An isosurface   reconstruction   algorithm   was   integrated   with   theMicrosoft  HoloLens,  a  self-contained  holographic  computer,  to enable  visualization  of  Computed  Tomography  (CT)  imaging superimposed  in  3D  on  the  patient. 
The  results  suggest  that though   the   device   has   limitations   at   its   current   stage,   the Microsoft  HoloLens  could  be  used  for  planning  and  overlaying the  imaging  information  on  the  patient  for  removal  of  lesions in  real-time.  
The  modules  developed  could  also  be  extended  to other types of surgery involving visualization of Digital Imaging and  Communication  in  Medicine  (DICOM)  files.


[Download paper here](http://nkalavak.github.io/files/08710203.pdf)

Recommended citation: N. Kalavakonda, L. Sekhar and B. Hannaford, "Augmented Reality Application for Aiding Tumor Resection in Skull-Base Surgery," <i> 2019 International Symposium on Medical Robotics (ISMR) </i>, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2019, pp. 1-6.
doi: 10.1109/ISMR.2019.8710203